https://it.mathworks.com/help/vision/ug/anchor-boxes-for-object-detection.html

Anchor Boxes for Object Detection
Object detection using deep learning neural networks can provide a fast and accurate means to predict the location and size of an object in an image. Ideally, the network returns valid objects in a timely manner, regardless of the scale of the objects. The use of anchor boxes improves the speed and efficiency for the detection portion of a deep learning neural network framework.

What Is an Anchor Box?
Anchor boxes are a set of predefined bounding boxes of a certain height and width. These boxes are defined to capture the scale and aspect ratio of specific object classes you want to detect and are typically chosen based on object sizes in your training datasets. During detection, the predefined anchor boxes are tiled across the image. The network predicts the probability and other attributes, such as background, intersection over union (IoU) and offsets for every tiled anchor box. The predictions are used to refine each individual anchor box. You can define several anchor boxes, each for a different object size. Anchor boxes are fixed initial boundary box guesses.

The network does not directly predict bounding boxes, but rather predicts the probabilities and refinements that correspond to the tiled anchor boxes. The network returns a unique set of predictions for every anchor box defined. The final feature map represents object detections for each class. The use of anchor boxes enables a network to detect multiple objects, objects of different scales, and overlapping objects.