# 2.3.3 - I/O in Pandas

## Reading data from heterogeneous sources

In our [first example](./01_intro.md#pandas-and-data-management), we used the `read_csv` function to create a DataFrame from data stored in a CSV file. However, Pandas supports many other formats.

For example, we could try reading an Excel file:

```py
df = pd.read_excel('data.xlsx')
```

!!!warning "Attention"
	To read (and write) from (to) Excel, you need to install the `openpyxl` library (`pip install openpyxl`).

Alternatively, you can read a JSON file or directly from a database:

```py
df = pd.read_json('data.json')
df = pd.read_sql(SQL_QUERY)
```

There is a complete list of the available (numerous) functions, which can be found in the [reference](https://pandas.pydata.org/pandas-docs/stable/reference/io.html). In general, however, the syntax is always `read_*(data_source)`, where `*` is replaced with the type of data source (`csv`, `excel`, etc.).

## Writing data to heterogeneous destinations

We can also write a DataFrame to a file using the dual functions to `read_`, which use the prefix `to_` followed by the destination file extension. For example, we can write a CSV file using the [`to_csv`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.DataFrame.to_csv.html) method:

```py
df.to_csv('train.xlsx')
```

## Adding features and data

Now let's say we want to add a new feature to an existing DataFrame. To do this, we start by creating a DataFrame from scratch:

```py
>>> df = pd.DataFrame([1,2,3,4,5], columns=['one'])
   one
0    1
1    2
2    3
3    4
4    5
```

We can add a new column simply by using the assignment operator and specifying its name:

```py
>>> df['two'] = df['one'] * 2
   one  two
0    1    2
1    2    4
2    3    6
3    4    8
4    5   10
```

We can then insert new samples at the end of the DataFrame. To do this, we first need to create a new DataFrame with dimensions consistent with the existing one, and then use the [`concat()`](https://pandas.pydata.org/docs/reference/api/pandas.concat.html) function:

```py
>>> df_add = pd.DataFrame([[6,7]], columns=['one', 'two'])
>>> df = pd.concat([df, df_add])
   one  two
0    1    2
1    2    4
2    3    6
3    4    8
4    5   10
0    6    7
```

Note that the `concat()` function accepts the `axis` parameter, among others. If it is equal to zero (as it is by default), `concat()` performs row-wise concatenation. If it is equal to 1, concatenation is performed column-wise. However, it is important to note that concatenation also occurs when the dimensions are not completely consistent. In fact, if we were to perform column-wise concatenation, the result would be:

```py
>>> pd.concat([df, df_add], axis=1)
   one  two  one  two
0    1    2 

 6.0  7.0
1    2    4  NaN  NaN
2    3    6  NaN  NaN
3    4    8  NaN  NaN
4    5   10  NaN  NaN
```

The values corresponding to rows with indices 1 to 4, which obviously do not exist, would automatically be set to *NaN*, which stands for *Not a Number*.